Explain object capabilities in more detail (#472)
ponylang/pony-tutorial: docs/object-capabilities/derived-authority.md

# Delegating and restricting authority

> ## [Plan]
>
> * demonstrate basic use in combination with file system access etc.
> * show how a derived authority can be constructed
> * refer to the patterns for more complex scenarios
>
> ## [TODO]
>
> * [ ] come up with a better title for the section
> * [ ] toc stuff and linking

Any interesting program will need to interact with the outside world by using operating system concepts, like accessing the network or the file system, or by creating and communicating with other programs.

> The operating system has granted the right to do so to the program at startup (but it might do some checks at runtime, for example controlling access to a file). This is called __ambient authority__.

Author: I'm not sure I actually did what you asked me for here and in the previous comment, but it feels better now. Please have another look

The operating system has no concept of how our program is composed inside, and it knows nothing about Pony specific concepts in particular. Pony requires operations which interact with the system
to be authorized, and allows us to restrict and delegate this authority inside our program.

> Recall the definition of capability from [ref]:

Author: Yes, that's the idea. I'm not 100% sure about the title of this section and the ordering though, so I kept it open

> Recall the definition of capability from [ref]:

Reviewer: Sounds good. I wanted to make sure there was no plan to reference that from elsewhere.

> A capability is an unforgeable token that (a) designates an object and (b) gives the program the authority to perform a specific set of actions on that object.

> In Pony, the Main actor is passed the environment object, which keeps an `AmbientAuth` in the `root` field. This value is the capability that represents the ambient authority given to us by the system.

Author: It does not mention the Pony runtime which sets up the env and instantiates the actor, but mentioning that here would be too specific I believe. What's the best way to refer to the `env: Env`passed to `Main` without being too technical but also not too vague?

> In Pony, the Main actor is passed the environment object, which keeps an `AmbientAuth` in the `root` field. This value is the capability that represents the ambient authority given to us by the system.

Reviewer: Good question. Not sure I have a good answer. Perhaps "In Pony, the Main actor is created with an `Env` object, which holds the unforgeable `AmbientAuth` token in its `root` field." Rather using "pass" which suggests some transfer, use the terminology of Pony itself where the `Env` is required in something call `create` -- best solution I can think of which avoid being vague while also not having to get into the runtime's role in it all.

Instead of allowing unfettered access to the outside world, Pony enforces the use of this authority.

> Here is a simple program that connects to example.com via TCP on port 80 and quits:

Reviewer: Drop "simple" please. It is a rather simple program, but as someone learns, seeing a word like "simple" then not fully understanding a program like this one can be discouraging.

```pony
use "net"

class MyTCPConnectionNotify is TCPConnectionNotify
  let _out: OutStream

  new iso create(out: OutStream) =>
    _out = out

  fun ref connected(conn: TCPConnection ref) =>
    _out.print("connected")
    conn.close()

  fun ref connect_failed(conn: TCPConnection ref) =>
    _out.print("connect_failed")

actor Connect
  new create(out: OutStream, auth: AmbientAuth) =>
    TCPConnection(auth, MyTCPConnectionNotify(out), "example.com", "80")

actor Main
  new create(env: Env) =>
    try Connect(env.out, env.root as AmbientAuth) end
```

> The Main actor authorizes the Connect actor by passing the ambient authority token on to it. This token is not forgeable since the `AmbientAuth` constructor is private—only the runtime glue code

Reviewer: Format `Main` and `Connect` please.

The only previous mention of token in this section is in the quote from the previous section. Can you work a mention of "ambient authority token" into this section earlier prior to the example?

Please use "unforgeable" rather than "not forgeable" so we state a consistent negation on forgeability.

Stating the runtime as "glue code" sounds dismissive to me. I understand what you mean though. Can you change it to something like: "This `AmbientAuthority` token is unforgeable since it is provided by the runtime itself so is guaranteed to have only one instance."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Main` actor authorizes the `Connect` actor by passing the ambient authority token on to it. This token is not forgeable since the `AmbientAuth` constructor is private—only the runtime glue code
```

Author: I think I solved most if not all of this now.

Regarding the use of "token", it's mentioned again right below the quote, in `which holds the unforgeable `AmbientAuth` token in its root field`. Is that enough to guide the reader?

can create the one and only instance.

> The Connect actor uses this authority when it creates a TCP connection:

Reviewer: `Connect` monospace/code formatting please.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Connect` actor uses this authority when it creates a TCP connection:
```

```pony
TCPConnection(auth, MyTCPConnectionNotify(out), "example.com", "80")
```

> The TCPConnection requires an authority as first parameter, and since the compiler checks that

Reviewer: `TCPConnection` monospace/code formatting please.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TCPConnection` requires an authority as first parameter, and since the compiler checks that
```

> the correct type was passed, this guarantees that a TCPConnection can only be created by an

Reviewer: `TCPConnection` monospace/code formatting please.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the correct type was passed, this guarantees that a `TCPConnection` can only be created by an
```

actor holding the required authorization. If you look into the implementation of the `TCPConnection`
constructor, you will notice that the authorization is not even used beyond the declaration of the

> parameter.

Reviewer: I am hesitant to suggest looking at the implementation of `TCPConnection` at this stage and especially hesitate to state "you will notice that the authorization is not even used beyond the declaration of the parameter." unless we explain **why** that is in the same location. Such an instance of taking a parameter only to not even use it will be, at the very least, odd to many programmers -- beginners and experiences alike.

## Restrict, then delegate your authority

In order to handle our own code and that of others more safely, and also to understand our code better,
we want to split up the authority, and only grant the particular authority a piece of code actually

> requires.

Reviewer: I think you know this, but as written this is not quite why we restrict authority. There is an added benefit of code readability and understandability, but the real reason we restrict and delegate is to minimize capabilities to only those which are necessary to safely accomplish the task at hand. Passing/allowing more capabilities than are necessary is possibly unsafe.

> Imagine we don't trust the `Connect` actor, so we don't want to provide it with more authority

Reviewer: Would you mind changing the "don't"'s to "do not"'s? Doing so should make it slightly easier to read for those without English as a primary language at the cost of reading awkwardly to primary English speakers.

> than needed. For example, there is no point in granting it filesystem access.

Reviewer: You have an implicit assumption here that the reader knows the `TCPConnection` does not need filesystem access. Please clarify what access/capabilities `TCPConnection` needs and does not need closer to the example above.

Author: I'm not sure I really made it clearer here

The first parameter of the `TCPConnection` constructor has the type

```pony
type TCPConnectionAuth is (AmbientAuth | NetAuth | TCPAuth | TCPConnectAuth)
```

> This looks like a nice hierarchy of authority, in order of decreasing rights. We can pass

Reviewer: I do not think the hierarchy of authority is obvious here. Rather than stating it looks like a nice hierarchy, can you change this to explain that it is a nice hierarchy of decreasing authority?

Author: I think I'll move that aspect into a separate section. It's interrupting the flow of understanding here.

Author: I think this has been solved

a reduced authority to our `Connect` actor like this:

```pony
actor Connect
  new create(out: OutStream, auth: TCPConnectionAuth) =>
    TCPConnection(auth, MyTCPConnectionNotify(out), "example.com", "80")

actor Main
  new create(env: Env) =>
    try Connect(env.out, TCPConnectAuth(env.root as AmbientAuth)) end
```

Now we are sure it cannot access the filesystem or listen on a TCP or UDP port. This is possible

> because there is a `TCPConnectAuth` constructor which accepts the AmbientAuth.

Reviewer: Will you textually highlight the changes made here? Then explain that by switching from accepting `AmbientAuth` to `TCPConnectAuth` we lose the ability to access the filesystem -- exactly as we want set out to do with the changes made here.

Author: How would I do that, the highlighting?
I made textual changes that should make it clearer.

> You can see this pattern over and over in the standard library.

Reviewer: Remove this please. The subsection does not need to end with a statement about the standard library as it is not about the standard library.

## Authorization-friendly interface

Consider the above example again, but this time let's treat the `Connect` actor as coming from
a 3rd party package. If the author of that package had not considered which authority exactly
was necessary, it would not be possible to restrict the authoritization given to its code.
A function with an `AmbientAuth` parameter will not accept a lesser auth token.

> Therefore it is necessary to design your packages and functions with this in mind.

Reviewer: Can you logically flip this around? By that I mean rather than placing the reader as using an outside package, place them as writing the outside package. This edit is a preference request as there is nothing wrong with how it is written, but I think switching it around will let you more cleanly and clearly jump off from the previous subsection where we made a change to the **implementation** rather than a change to how the implementation is used.

Author: I did that and also expanded a bit. Not sure the introduction of another level of type aliasing is really useful though.

In order to handle our own code and that of others more safely, and also to understand our code better,
we want to split up the authority, and only grant the particular authority a piece of code actually
requires.

Imagine we don't trust the `Connect` actor, so we don't want to provide it with more authority
than needed. For example, there is no point in granting it filesystem access, since it is supposed
to do network things (specifically, TCP), not access the filesystem. To understand how we can achieve this,
let's look at the authority types involved.

The first parameter of the `TCPConnection` constructor has the type

```pony
type TCPConnectionAuth is (AmbientAuth | NetAuth | TCPAuth | TCPConnectAuth)
```

so instead of passing the entire `AmbientAuth`, we can "downgrade" that to a `TCPConnectAuth`,
pass it to the `Connect` actor and have that pass it to the `TCPConnection` constructor:

```pony
actor Connect
  new create(out: OutStream, auth: TCPConnectionAuth) =>
    TCPConnection(auth, MyTCPConnectionNotify(out), "example.com", "80")

actor Main
  new create(env: Env) =>
    try Connect(env.out, TCPConnectAuth(env.root as AmbientAuth)) end
```

> Now we are sure it cannot access the filesystem or listen on a TCP or UDP port.

Reviewer: This sentence confused me on re-reading as I often forget the hierarchy of authorities in net. I do not think it should block merging this, but perhaps before the code block when talking about "downgrading" a brief little rewrite might help?

> ...`AmbientAuth`, we can "downgrade" that to a `TCPConnectAuth`,...

to

> ...`AmbientAuth` (the root of all authority), we can "downgrade" that to a `TCPConnectAuth` (the most restrictive authority in net),...

Reviewer: You explain this further below so not much is needed, but contextualizing the "downgrade" might make it easier to understand on first read.

Author: Sure thing!

## Authorization-friendly interface

Consider the above example again, but this time let's think of the `Connect` actor being part
of a 3rd party package that we are building. Our goal is to write the actor in such a way that
users of our package can grant it only the authority necessary for it to function.

As the package author, it is then our responsibility to realize that the minimal authority
possible is the `TCPConnectAuth`. But anything that the `TCPConnection` constructor accepts
is valid, and a user of our package might be strict and pass a `TCPConnectionAuth`, or might

> be lax and just pass the `AmbientAuth`.

Reviewer: `TCPConnectionAuth` includes `AmbientAuth` -- did you mean `TCPConnectAuth`?

# Delegating and restricting authority

> ## [Plan]
>
> * demonstrate basic use in combination with file system access etc.
> * show how a derived authority can be constructed
> * refer to the patterns for more complex scenarios
>
> ## [TODO]
>
> * [ ] come up with a better title for the section
> * [ ] toc stuff and linking

Any interesting program will need to interact with the outside world, like accessing the network or the file system, or by creating and communicating with other programs.
We call __ambient authority__ all those rights implicitly granted to the program to make these things possible, and because Pony makes this concept *explicit*, we need to take
the time to talk about what it means and how it works. In other languages like for example C, you can always attempt to do an operation like I/O, and it will usually succeed

> save some runtime checks (your disk being full might make an operation fail, for example). But in Pony, any piece of code interacting with the outside world needs the authority to do so.

Author: Thanks!

The operating system essentially knows nothing about the structure of any program it runs, in particular it is ignorant of any Pony specific concepts.
In order to impose that some code is authorized for an operation like writing to disk, Pony requires a special argument to be passed, a capability bearing the authority required for the

> task at hand. The type system guarantees that no code that has not been passed this capability can perform the task requiring authorization, so this kind of safety is guaranteed at compile time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
task at hand. The type system guarantees that inadequate capabilities for a task fail at compile time.
```

Purpose here being to remove the double-negative of "**no** code that has **not** been passed".

Author: In addition it talks about passing the wrong capabiity, where I only thought about "none". Thanks!

users of our package can grant it only the authority necessary for it to function.

As the package author, it is then our responsibiltiy to realize that the minimal authority
possible is the `TCPConnectAuth`. But anything that the `TCPConnection` constructor accepts
is valid, and a user of our package might be strict and pass a `TCPConnectionAuth`, or might
be lax and just pass the `AmbientAuth`.

Our current implementation already satisfies all this, because `TCPConnectionAuth` is a union
type of all possible authorization types and we use that. If we want, we could also write

```pony
type ConnectActorAuth is TCPConnectionAuth
```

and use this type alias instead, signalling to the user that anything that is a `TCPConnectionAuth`
is allowed as the authority token passed to the `Connect` actor.

## Authority hierarchies

Looking again at the type of the authorization parameter to TCPConnection,

```pony
type TCPConnectionAuth is (AmbientAuth | NetAuth | TCPAuth | TCPConnectAuth)
```

you might notice that this looks like a hierarchy of authorities:

`AmbientAuth >> NetAuth >> TCPAuth >> TCPConnectAuth`

> where in this paragraph, ">>" means "grants at least as much authority as". In fact, the AmbientAuth

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where in this paragraph, ">>" means "grants at least as much authority as". In fact, the `AmbientAuth`
```
